# Mechanistic-model-of-neurite-outgrowth
Dynamic balance between vesicle transport and microtubule growth enables neurite outgrowth. Yadaw AS, Siddiq MM, Rabinovich V, Tolentino R, Hansen J, Iyengar R. PLoS Comput Biol. 2019 May 1;15(5):e1006877. doi: 10.1371/journal.pcbi.1006877. eCollection 2019 May. PMID: 31042702 or https://journals.plos.org/ploscompbiol/article?id=10.1371/journal.pcbi.1006877
## Summary of the paper:
Mechanisms that cause a change of state of a cell arise from unique patterns of interactions between multiple subcellular processes (SCPs). Neurite outgrowth (NOG) is such a change of cell state where a neuron puts out a long process that eventually becomes the axon. We used a top-down based approach to mathematically model interactions between SCPs involved in NOG. These include membrane production at the cell body, membrane delivery from the cell body to the neurite tip and microtubule growth within the neurite. Our analyses show how the different SCPs interact with each other to enable NOG at a given velocity under physiological conditions. This approach is different from the commonly used bottom-up approaches that focus on predicting cell functions based on the activity of molecular interaction networks. Our simulations predict that lower-level sibling SCPs (e.g. vesicle tethering at and vesicle fusion with the plasma membrane) within a group can compensate for each other under physiological conditions, while such simple relationships do not exist between higher level SCPs (e.g. vesicle exocytosis and vesicle transport along microtubules). We predicted that imbalances of activities between higher-level SCPs induce dystrophic bulbs (a pathological response) and validated these predictions via siRNA ablation experiments.
